
planetblupi(6) -- a delirious spell-binding game
================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`planetblupi` [<optional>...]

## DESCRIPTION

**Planet Blupi** is a strategy and adventure game. It subtly blends action with
thought-provoking challenges. Behind the quiet and gentle facade, you'll enjoy
a fascinating diversion full of surprises. Planet Blupi is ideal for ages
12 to 99..

This version contains over 30 missions and a built in editor, which enables you
to construct your own missions.

## CONFIGURATION

**Planet Blupi** supports at least GNU/Linux 2.6.32, macOS 10.9 and Microsoft
Windows Vista. If your OS is not listed, maybe it's possible to build yourself
the game. Most Unix and Unix-like OS should be supported.

For the video output, a 3D accelerated video card is highly recommended. It's
still possible to use pure software rendering in all other cases.

For the sound card, any cards supported by ALSA, PulseAudio, macOS or
DirectSound should work fine.

## SCREEN

The game **Planet Blupi** runs in full screen by using your desktop resolution.
If you are encounting errors, you can start the game by default in windowed
mode. Proceed as follows:

1. Quit the game **Planet Blupi**.
2. Open the file `share/planetblupi/data/config.json` with a text editor.
3. Replace `fullscreen: true` by `fullscreen: false`.
4. Save and restart the game.

In this mode the screen is no more scrolled if the mouse touches the window
borders. Use the keyboard arrows instead.

It's possible to start the game with `--fullscreen off` instead of editing
the `config.json` file.

Another way is to start the game in legacy mode. With this mode, the game
runs with the original 640x480 resolution. Use `--legacy` on the command
line.

If the problem persists, maybe you should try to start the game with the
software renderer. Edit the `config.json` file and add `"renderer": "software"`
or start the game with `--renderer software`.

Another possibility exists. You can try to change the driver used by the
accelerated renderer. By default it uses `"direct3d"`, you can change by
`"opengl"` with `"driver": "opengl"` with the `config.json` file or
`--driver opengl` by command line argument.

## MOUSE

The left button is always used in three steps:

  1. Select a Blupi.
  2. Click where you want him to act.
  3. Click the button corresponding to the required operation.

If the chosen Blupi is already selected (blue or red circle around him), step 1)
is not necessary.

You may select several Blupis by maintaining the <kbd>Shift</kbd> button
pressed.

The right button is a shortcut. It orders the selected Blupi to do the most
useful operation on the selected spot.

## KEYBOARD

  * <kbd>Arrows</kbd>:
    Scrolls the visible part of the scene.

  * <kbd>Spacebar</kbd>:
    Shows or hides items.

  * <kbd>F1</kbd>:
    Describes the goal without interrupting the game.

  * <kbd>F5</kbd>:
    Normal speed (x1).

  * <kbd>F6</kbd>:
    Double speed (x2).

  * <kbd>Home</kbd>:
    Returns to place of mission departure

  * <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>F9</kbd>..<kbd>F12</kbd>:
    Bookmarks a spot.

  * <kbd>F9</kbd>..<kbd>F12</kbd>:
    Returns to the corresponding bookmarked spot.

  * <kbd>Pause</kbd>:
    Temporarily suspends the game (excepted with the hard difficulty).

When you switch to another application, the game is automatically paused.

## MUSIC

The music is provided in *OGG* and *MIDI* formats. The *OGG* variant is preferred
because the render is the same for all platforms. For purist fanboys, it's
possible to enforce the *MIDI* variant by starting the game with the
`--restore-midi` command line argument. Note that in this case, it's possible
to lose some instruments, it depends of your system.

You can edit the `share/planetblupi/data/config.json` file and add an entry
`"restoremidi": true`, or simply use the new settings available in the global
settings screen in the game.

If you want, you can overload all musics with yours by providing *OGG* or *MIDI*
music files in your user directory.

On Windows, type `%APPDATA%\Epsitec SA\Planet Blupi` in the file browser.
On macOS, look at `~/Library/Application Support/Epsitec SA/Planet Blupi`.
On Linux, look at `~/.local/share/Epsitec SA/Planet Blupi`.

You can create a `music` sub-directory with your musics. For example:
`%LOCALAPPDATA%\Epsitec SA\Planet Blupi\music\music000.ogg`.

Only 10 musics are supported: `music000` to `music009`.

## OPTIONS

  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Print this help message and exit.

  * `-V`, `--version`:
    Print version and exit.

  * `-s`, `--speed-rate`:
    Change the speed rate `[1;2]` (default: `1`).

  * `-t`, `--timer-interval`:
    Set the timer interval (refresh). The default value is 50ms. This is an
    advanced option because it changes the main events loop frequency.

  * `-f`, `--fullscreen`:
    Load in fullscreen `[on;off]` (default: `on`).

  * `-z`, `--zoom`:
    Change the window scale (only if fullscreen is `off`) `[1;2]`
    (default: `1`).

  * `-l`, `--legacy`:
    Start the game in legacy display mode (640x480).

  * `-r`, `--renderer`:
    Set a renderer `[auto;software;accelerated]` (default: `auto`). Use the
    `software` renderer if the `accelerated` renderer is bugged. Note that you
    can try other drivers (option `-d`) before forcing the `software` renderer.

  * `-d`, `--driver`:
    Set a driver `[auto;direct3d;direct3d11;opengl;opengles2;opengles]`
    (default: `auto`, ignored with `software` renderer).

  * `-c`, `--enable-recorder`:
    Enable the recorder feature (<kbd>F3</kbd>/<kbd>F4</kbd>). When playing,
    you can start a record with <kbd>F3</kbd> and stop with <kbd>F4</kbd>.

  * `-p`, `--play-record`:
    Play a record generated by <kbd>F3</kbd> (`--enable-recorder`).

  * `-b`, `--restore-bugs`:
    Restore funny original bugs of older versions < v1.9. It can be very fun
    and interesting for speedruns.

    **Tower rays:** with this bug, it's possible to add rays on a map even
    without tower. It's possible only when building a new map.

    **Mine flag:** you can build a mine without prospecting if you know exactly
    where is the flag case.

    **Enemy control**: you can take the enemy control by going in an enemy
    factory while the door is open.

    **Duplicate everything**: this bug is very useful for duplicating objects
    by sending the same order to two Blupis.

    **Duplicate time bomb**: you can duplicate an amorced bomb by taking.

    **Take trapped ennemy**: it's possible to take a trapped enemy; it's useless
    but possible.

    **Set fire**: you can add invisible fire on every type of cells (when
    building a map).

  * `-m`, `--restore-midi`:
    Restore playback based on MIDI music instead of OGG.

  * `-q`, `--render-quality`:
    Enable anti-aliasing [on;off] (default: on, ignored if windowed).

## AUTHOR

**Planet Blupi** is an original creation of Epsitec SA.

http://www.blupi.org <info@blupi.org>

## COPYRIGHT

planetblupi is Copyright (C) 1997, Daniel Roux & EPSITEC SA and
Copyright (C) 2017-2021, Mathieu Schroeter
